Tuesday afternoon arrived and turned into evening. The village of St. Petersburg was still grieving. The missing children had not been found. Public prayers had been said for them, and many private prayers were offered with whole hearts, but no good news came from the cave. Most of the searchers had given up and returned to their daily jobs, saying it seemed the children could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill and often delirious. People said it was heartbreaking to hear her call her child's name, lift her head for a minute, then lay it down again with a sigh. Aunt Polly had fallen into a deep sadness, and her gray hair was almost white. The village went to rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.

In the middle of the night a wild ringing burst from the village bells. In an instant the streets filled with frantic, half‑clothed people shouting, “Come out! Come out! They’re found! They’re found!” Tin pans and horns added to the noise. The crowd gathered and moved toward the river, where the children arrived in an open carriage drawn by shouting citizens. People crowded around the carriage, joined its journey home, and marched triumphantly up the main street, shouting cheers again and again.

The village was lit up; no one went back to bed. It was the greatest night the little town had ever seen. During the first half‑hour, a procession of villagers passed through Judge Thatcher’s house. They seized the rescued children, kissed them, held Mrs. Thatcher’s hand, tried to speak but could not, and left with tears falling everywhere.

Aunt Polly was completely happy, and Mrs. Thatcher was almost as happy. She would be completely happy as soon as the messenger who was sent with the great news to the cave told her husband. Tom lay on a sofa with an eager audience around him and told the story of the wonderful adventure. He added many exciting details to make it more interesting. He finished by describing how he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition. He followed two paths as far as his kite string could reach. Then he followed a third path to the full length of the kite string. He was about to turn back when he saw a distant speck that looked like daylight. He dropped the line, reached for it, pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the wide Mississippi River rolling by.

If it had been only night, he would not have seen the sliver of daylight and would not have kept exploring the tunnel. He said he went back for Becky, gave her the good news, and she told him not to worry because she was tired, knew she was going to die, and accepted it. He explained how he struggled with her and convinced her, and how she almost died of joy when she finally saw the blue spot of daylight. He pushed his way out through the opening and then helped her out. They sat there and wept with happiness. A few men arrived in a small boat; Tom called to them, described their situation and how hungry they were. At first the men did not believe the story, saying, “You are five miles downstream from the valley where the cave is.” Then they took the boat, rowed to a house, gave them dinner, let them rest until two or three hours after dark, and finally brought them home.

Before sunrise, Judge Thatcher and the small group of searchers followed the trail of string markers they had left in the cave and learned the great news.

Three days and nights of hard work and hunger in the cave did not disappear quickly, as Tom and Becky soon found out. They stayed in bed all Wednesday and Thursday, and they kept getting more tired and worn out. Tom got up a little on Thursday, went downtown on Friday, and was almost as strong as before on Saturday. Becky, however, did not leave her room until Sunday, and she looked as if she had gone through a serious illness.

Tom heard that Huck was sick and visited him on Friday, but he was not allowed into the bedroom. The same happened on Saturday and Sunday. After that, he was let in every day, but he was told to stay quiet about his adventure and not bring up any exciting subjects. The Widow Douglas stayed nearby to make sure he obeyed. At home, Tom learned about the incident on Cardiff Hill and that the “ragged man’s” body had finally been found in the river near the ferry landing. He had probably drowned while trying to escape.

About two weeks after Tom’s rescue from the cave, he set out to visit Huck, who was now strong enough to listen to exciting stories. Tom thought he had some tales that would interest Huck. On his way, he stopped at Judge Thatcher’s house to see Becky. The judge and some friends kept Tom talking, and someone asked him jokingly if he would like to go back into the cave. Tom said he didn’t mind. The judge replied:

“Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I have no doubt. But we have taken care of that. No one will get lost in that cave again.”

“Why?”

“Because I covered the big door with boiler‑plate two weeks ago, locked it three times, and I have the keys.”

Tom turned pale.

“What’s wrong, boy? Someone, run! Get a glass of water!”

Water was brought and poured over Tom’s face.

“Ah, that’s better. What was bothering you, Tom?”

“Oh, Judge, Indian Joe is in the cave!”