After breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and try to find out how he was killed, but Jim didn’t want to. He said it would bring bad luck and, besides, he thought the spirit might come after us. He said a man who isn’t buried is more likely to wander around as a ghost than one who is properly buried. That sounded reasonable, so I stopped. Still, I kept thinking about it and wishing I knew who shot the man and why.

We searched the clothes we had and found eight dollars in silver sewn into the lining of an old blanket coat. Jim guessed the people in that house had stolen the coat, because if they had known the money was there they wouldn’t have left it. I said I thought they had killed him too, but Jim didn’t want to talk about that. I said:

“Now you say it’s bad luck, but what did you say when I brought the snake‑skin I found on the ridge two days ago? You said it was the worst luck to touch a snake‑skin with my hands. Well, here’s your bad luck! We’ve found all this loot and eight dollars as well. I wish we could have this kind of luck every day, Jim.”

“Never mind, honey, never mind. Don’t get too excited. It’s coming. I tell you, it’s coming.”

It really happened, too. It was a Tuesday when we had that talk. After dinner on Friday we were lying in the grass at the top of the ridge and we ran out of tobacco. I went to the cave to get more and found a rattlesnake inside. I killed it and put the dead snake at the foot of Jim’s blanket, thinking it would be funny when Jim saw it.  

That night I forgot about the snake. When Jim threw himself onto the blanket while I lit a lamp, the snake’s mate was there and bit him.  

He jumped up shouting, and the first thing the light showed was the curled‑up snake ready to strike again. I knocked it out with a stick in a second, and Jim grabbed his whisky jug and began to pour it over the bite.  

He was barefoot, and the snake bit him right on the heel. All of this happened because I was foolish enough not to remember that when you leave a dead snake, its mate comes and coils around it. Jim told me to cut off the snake’s head and throw it away, then skin the body and roast a piece of it. I did that, and he ate it, saying it would help cure him. He also made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist, saying that would help too.  

Then I slipped away quietly and threw the rest of the snake into the bushes, because I didn’t want Jim to find out it was my fault if I could avoid it.

Jim kept drinking from the jug. Sometimes he lost his mind, stumbled around and shouted. Each time he came back to himself, he started drinking again. His foot swelled a lot, and his leg swelled too. After a while the drunken feeling faded, so I thought he was fine. I would rather be bitten by a snake than drink my dad’s whisky.

Jim stayed in bed for four days and nights. Then the swelling disappeared and he got better. I decided I would never touch a snake‑skin again, now that I know what happened. Jim said he thought I would trust him next time. He said that handling a snake‑skin brings terrible bad luck. Maybe we have not seen the worst yet. He said he would rather see the new moon over his left shoulder a thousand times than hold a snake‑skin. I began to feel the same way. I have always thought that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of the most careless and foolish things a person can do. Old Hank Bunker did it once and bragged about it. Less than two years later he got drunk, fell from the shot tower and ended up flat as a board. They slid his body sideways between two barn doors for a coffin and buried him that way, they say, but I did not see it. My dad told me. Anyway, it all happened because of looking at the moon like a fool.

Well, the days passed and the river kept flowing between its banks. The first thing we did was bait a big hook with a skinned rabbit, set it, and catch a catfish that was as big as a man—six foot two inches long and over two hundred pounds. We couldn’t handle it, of course; it would have thrown us into Illinois. We just stood there and watched it thrash around until it drowned. We found a brass button in its stomach, a round ball, and lots of rubbish. We split the ball open with a hatchet and found a spool inside. Jim said it had been there a long time, wrapped up to make a ball. It was the biggest fish ever caught in the Mississippi, I think. Jim said he had never seen a larger one. It would have been worth a lot in the village. They sell fish like that by the pound at the market house; everyone buys some. Its meat is as white as snow and makes a good fry.

Next morning I said it was getting slow and boring, and I wanted to do something exciting. I thought I would cross the river to see what was happening. Jim liked the idea, but he warned that I would have to go in the dark and be careful. Then he thought again and asked, “Could I wear some of those old clothes and dress like a girl?” That was a good idea too. So we shortened one of the calico dresses, and I turned up my trouser legs to my knees and put it on. Jim fastened it with the hooks, and it fit reasonably well. I put on the sun bonnet and tied it under my chin. From a distance, my face looked like a small opening in a stove pipe. Jim said nobody would recognize me, even in daylight. I practiced all day to get used to the outfit, and eventually I could move pretty well in it. Jim only said I didn’t walk like a girl, and that I should stop pulling up my dress to reach my trouser pocket. I noticed and did better.

I set off up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark.

I started toward the town from a little below the ferry landing, and the current carried me to the edge of the town. I tied up and walked along the bank. A light was burning in a small hut that hadn’t been lived in for a long time, and I wondered who was staying there. I went up and peeked through the window. Inside, a woman about forty years old was knitting by a candle on a pine table. I didn’t recognize her; she was a stranger, because in that town I knew every face. I felt lucky, because I was getting weak and scared. I feared that people might recognize my voice and find me out. If this woman had lived in such a small town for a few days, she could tell me everything I needed to know. So I knocked on the door and decided I would not forget that I was a girl.
