They asked us a lot of questions. They wanted to know why we covered the raft that way and why we stayed on it during the day instead of moving. Was Jim a runaway black man? I said,  

“Goodness, would a runaway black man run south?”  

No, they said he wouldn’t. I had to explain, so I said:  

“My family lived in Pike County, Missouri, where I was born. Everyone died except me, my father, and my brother Ike. My father said he would pack up and go live with Uncle Ben, who has a small one‑horse place on the river, forty‑four miles below Orleans. My father was pretty poor and owed money. When he got there he only had sixteen dollars left and our slave, Jim. That wasn’t enough for a fourteen‑hundred‑mile trip, a deck passage, or any other way.  

When the river rose, my father got lucky one day. He found a piece of a raft, so we thought we could go down to Orleans on it. His luck didn’t last. A steamboat ran over the front corner of the raft one night. We all fell overboard and went under the wheel. Jim and I came up all right, but my father was drunk and Ike was only four years old, so they never came up again.  

The next day or two we had a lot of trouble because people kept coming in small boats trying to take Jim away from me, saying they thought he was a runaway black man. We don’t travel during the day any more; at night they leave us alone.”  

The duke says:

Leave me alone so I can figure out a way for us to run during the day if we want to. I’ll think about it and make a plan that will fix the problem. We’ll leave it alone for today, because we don’t want to go past that town in daylight—it might not be good for us.

As night came, it started to get dark and look like it would rain. The heat made lightning flash low in the sky, and the leaves began to tremble. It was going to be very ugly, and it was easy to see that. So the duke and the king went to check our wigwam to see what the beds were like. My bed was made of straw, a little better than Jim’s, which was made of corn husks. There are always bits of corn stuck in the husks, and they poke you and hurt. When you roll over, the dry husks sound like you’re rolling in a pile of dead leaves, and the rustling wakes you up. The duke said he would take my bed, but the king said he would not. He said:

“I think the difference in rank means a corn‑husk bed isn’t suitable for me to sleep on. You should take the husk bed yourself.”

Jim and I started to sweat again, fearing there would be more trouble between them. So we were glad when the duke said:

“It is my destiny to be trampled under the iron heel of oppression. Misfortune has broken my once proud spirit; I give up, I submit. This is my fate. I am alone in the world—let me suffer; I can bear it.”

We left as soon as it was dark and safe. The king told us to stay out in the middle of the river and not show a light until we were far downstream from the town. We soon saw a small group of lights – that was the town – and passed it about half a mile away. When we were three‑quarters of a mile downstream we raised our signal lantern. At about ten o’clock it started to rain, the wind blew, thunder rolled, and lightning flashed everywhere. The king ordered us to stay on watch until the weather improved. Then he and the duke went into the wigwam and slept for the night. My watch was until midnight, but I would not have gone to bed even if I had a bed, because you don’t see a storm like that every day. My goodness, the wind screamed! Every few seconds a flash lit up the white‑capped waves for half a mile around, and you could see the islands looking dusty through the rain, the trees shaking in the wind; then a loud crack – boom, boom, rumble – and the thunder kept rolling and stopping, and another flash would follow, another big strike. The waves almost washed me off the raft many times, but I was not wearing any clothes and didn’t mind. We had no trouble with snags; the lightning was flashing so constantly that we could see it enough to turn the raft this way or that and avoid them.

I was on the middle watch, but I was already very sleepy, so Jim offered to take the first half for me. He was always very helpful.

I tried to get into the hut, but the king and the duke were lying with their legs spread out, so there was no room for me. I stayed outside. I didn’t mind the rain because it was warm and the waves weren’t high.

Around two o’clock they came up again, and Jim was about to call me, but he changed his mind. He thought the waves weren’t high enough to be dangerous. He was wrong, because soon a huge wave hit and knocked me overboard. It made Jim laugh a lot. He was the easiest person to make laugh, anyway.

I took over the watch while Jim lay down and snored. Eventually the storm completely calmed. When the first cabin light appeared, I woke him up and we moved the raft into a hidden spot for the night.

The king took out an old, worn deck of cards after breakfast, and he and the duke played seven‑up for a while, five cents per game. After a while they got bored and decided to "plan a campaign," as they called it. The duke reached into his bag and pulled out a stack of small printed flyers, then read them aloud.

One flyer announced, “The celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban of Paris will lecture on the Science of Phrenology at a certain place on a certain day. Admission is ten cents, and character charts are twenty‑five cents each.” The duke said that was him. Another flyer called him the “world‑renowned Shakespearean tragedian, Garrick the Younger, of Drury Lane, London.” Other flyers gave him many different names and claimed he had done amazing things, such as finding water and gold with a divining rod and breaking witch spells.

Then the duke said, “The dramatic muse is my favorite. Have you ever stepped on a stage, Your Majesty?”

“No,” said the king.

“You will, before three more days pass, Fallen Grandeur,” replied the duke. “When we reach the first decent town, we’ll rent a hall and stage the sword fight from *Richard III* and the balcony scene from *Romeo and Juliet*. What do you think?”

“I’m in for anything that pays, Bilgewater,” the king answered. “But I don’t know anything about acting, and I’ve never seen much of it. I was too young when the palace used to have performances. Can you teach me?”

“Easy!” said the duke.

“Alright. I’m ready for something new, so let’s start right away.”

The duke explained everything about Romeo and Juliet. He said he was used to playing Romeo, so the king could play Juliet.

"But Juliet is such a young girl, Duke. My bald head and white beard will look odd next to her, maybe."

"Don't worry. The country folk won't think about that. Besides, you'll be in costume, and that makes all the difference. Juliet will be on a balcony, enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed. She will be wearing her nightgown and a ruffled nightcap. Here are the costumes for the parts."

He took out two or three curtain‑calico outfits, which he called medieval armor for Richard III and the other character. He also brought a long white cotton nightshirt with a matching ruffled nightcap. The king was pleased. The duke then opened his book and read the parts aloud, moving around dramatically to show how they should be performed. He gave the book to the king and told him to memorize his role.

There was a small one‑horse town about three miles down the road. After dinner the duke said he had figured out a way to travel in daylight without it being dangerous for Jim, so he would go down to the town and fix it. The king said he would go too, to see if he could help. We had run out of coffee, so Jim said I should go with them in the canoe to get some.

When we arrived, nobody was moving. The streets were empty and completely still, like a Sunday. We saw a sick black man lying in the sun in a backyard. He told us that everyone who wasn’t too young, too sick, or too old had gone to a camp‑meeting about two miles away in the woods. The king got the directions and said he would go to the camp‑meeting and work there as much as he could, and that I could go too.  

The duke said he was looking for a printing office. We found a small one above a carpenter’s shop. All the carpenters and printers had gone to the meeting, and the doors were unlocked. The place was dirty and littered, with ink stains and flyers showing horses and runaway black men on the walls. The duke took off his coat and said he felt fine now. So the king and I set out for the camp‑meeting.  

We arrived after about half an hour, soaked from the heat. It was an extremely hot day. Around a thousand people had come from within twenty miles. The woods were full of horse teams and wagons tied everywhere, feeding from troughs and stamping to keep flies away. There were shelters made of poles and covered with branches where they sold lemonade and gingerbread, and there were piles of watermelons, green corn, and similar goods.

The preaching took place under the same kind of sheds, but they were larger and held crowds of people. The benches were made from outer slabs of logs, with holes bored in the round side to insert sticks as legs. They had no backs. The preachers stood on high platforms at one end of the sheds. The women wore sun bonnets; some wore linsey‑woolsey dresses, some wore gingham dresses, and a few of the younger women wore calico. Some of the young men were barefoot, and some of the children wore only a tow‑linen shirt. Some of the older women were knitting, and some of the younger people were courting secretly.

The first time we arrived, the preacher was leading a hymn. He sang two lines and everyone joined in. It sounded wonderful because so many people sang together in a lively way. Then he added two more lines, and so on. The congregation woke up more and more, singing louder and louder. Toward the end, some people began to groan, and others began to shout.

Then the preacher started his sermon, speaking seriously. He moved to one side of the platform, then to the other, and then leaned over the front. He waved his arms and his whole body as he shouted his words with all his strength. Occasionally he lifted his Bible, opened it, and held it up while shouting, “It’s the bronze serpent in the wilderness! Look at it and live!” The people shouted back, “Glory!—A‑men!”

He continued, and the crowd groaned, cried, and said “amen”:

“Come to the mourners’ bench! Come, black with sin! (amen) Come, sick and sore! (amen) Come, lame, halting, and blind! (amen) Come, poor and needy, sunk in shame! (amen) Come, all who are worn, soiled, and suffering! Come with a broken spirit! Come with a contrite heart! Come in your rags, your sin, and your dirt! The water that cleanses is free, the door of heaven stands open—oh, enter and find rest!” (amen, glory, hallelujah!)

And so it went on. You could no longer understand what the preacher was saying because of all the shouting and crying. People stood up all over the crowd and forced their way, using all their strength, to the mourning bench, tears streaming down their faces. When the mourners had gathered on the front benches, they sang, shouted, and threw themselves onto the straw, acting wildly and uncontrollably.

Well, the first thing I knew was that the king was leaving, and you could hear him above everyone else. Then he rushed up onto the platform, and the preacher begged him to speak to the people, and he did. He told them he had been a pirate for thirty years in the Indian Ocean. His crew had been greatly reduced last spring in a fight, and now he was home to recruit new men. He was grateful because he had been robbed the night before and was left on a steamboat with no money. He said it was the best thing that ever happened to him, because he felt like a changed man and was happy for the first time in his life. Even though he was poor, he was going to start right away and work his way back to the Indian Ocean. He wanted to spend the rest of his life trying to bring pirates onto the right path. He believed he could do it better than anyone, since he knew all the pirate crews in that ocean. He knew it would take a long time and that he had no money, but he would get there anyway. Every time he convinced a pirate, he told him, “Don’t thank me, don’t give me credit. It all belongs to the good people in Pokeville camp‑meeting, our true brothers and supporters, and that preacher there, the truest friend a pirate ever had!”

He burst into tears, and so did everyone else. Then someone shouted, “Let’s collect money for him, let’s collect!” About six people hurried to do it, but another voice said, “Let him pass the hat around!” Everyone agreed, even the preacher.

The king walked through the crowd, wiping his eyes with his hat, blessing the people, praising them and thanking them for helping the poor pirates far away. Every now and then the prettiest girls, with tears on their cheeks, would ask if they could kiss him to remember him. He always let them. He hugged and kissed some of them five or six times. He was invited to stay for a week, and everyone wanted him to live in their homes, saying it would be an honor. He replied that, since it was the last day of the camp meeting, he couldn’t stay, and he was in a hurry to reach the Indian Ocean and work with the pirates.

When we got back to the raft and he counted the money, he had collected $87.75. He had also found a three‑gallon jug of whisky hidden under a wagon while heading home through the woods. The king said to take everything around, because it would last longer than anything he ever earned in his missionary work. He added that talking was useless; heathens aren’t worth much compared with pirates when it comes to running a camp meeting.

The duke thought he was doing pretty well until the king arrived, but after that he wasn’t so sure. He prepared and printed two small jobs for farmers in the printing office—horse bills—and collected four dollars. He also received ten dollars worth of advertisements for the paper. He offered to place them for four dollars if the advertisers paid in advance, and they did. The paper cost two dollars a year, but he accepted three subscriptions at fifty cents each, as long as the subscribers paid him in advance. They would pay with cordwood and onions, as usual. He said he had just bought the business and lowered the price as much as he could, planning to run it for cash. He wrote a short poem himself—three verses, a bit sweet and sad—titled “Yes, crush, cold world, this breaking heart.” He prepared it for printing in the paper and did not charge anything for it. In total, he earned nine and a half dollars and said he had done a fairly good day’s work.

Then he showed us another small job he had printed for free, because it was for us. It had a picture of a runaway black man carrying a bundle on a stick over his shoulder, and “$200 reward” written underneath. The text was all about Jim and described him in a few lines. It said he had run away from St. Jacques’ plantation, forty miles downriver from New Orleans, last winter, and probably went north. Whoever caught him and sent him back could claim the reward and expenses.

“Now,” says the duke, “after tonight we can go out during the day if we want. When we see anyone coming, we can tie Jim’s hands and feet with a rope, put him in the wigwam, show this handbill and say we captured him up the river. We’ll say we are too poor to travel on a steamboat, so we got this little raft on credit from friends and are heading down to get the reward. Handcuffs and chains would look nicer on Jim, but that wouldn’t fit our story of being so poor. It would look like jewelry. Ropes are the right choice—we must keep the unities, as we say on the stage.”

We all thought the duke was clever, and there would be no trouble running in daylight. We decided we could travel far enough that night to get out of the reach of the meeting we expected the duke’s printing work would cause in that small town; then we could keep moving as fast as we wanted.

We stayed hidden and still, and we didn’t leave until almost ten o’clock. Then we slipped away, far from the town, and we didn’t light our lantern until we were out of sight.

When Jim asked me to take the watch at four in the morning, he said:

“Huck, do you think we’ll run into any more kings on this trip?”

“No,” I said, “I don’t think so.”

“Okay,” he replied, “that’s fine. I’m not expecting one or two kings, but that’s enough. This one is a heavy drinker, and the duke isn’t much better.”

I realized Jim had been trying to get him to speak French so he could hear how it sounded, but he said he had been in this country so long and had so many problems that he had forgotten it.
