It had been three or four months since winter started.
By then, I could read and write, sort of. I knew how to do basic math,
like multiplying six times seven is thirty-five. But that's as far as I'd
ever get. To be honest, I didn't really like maths.

At first, I hated school. However, over time, it became more bearable.
When I was extremely tired, I would play hooky and face the consequences
the next day. But the punishment actually helped me relax and feel better.
As a result, I started to enjoy school more. Living with the widow's rules,
they weren't as harsh on me as they used to be. Sleeping in a bed at night
was getting easier for me to get used to. Before the cold weather, I would
often sneak out and sleep in the woods. It was a welcome break.

I had grown accustomed to both old and new ways of living.
The widow said I was making progress slowly but surely, and that I was
doing well. She wasn't embarrassed by me at all.

One morning, as I was getting ready for breakfast, I accidentally knocked over the salt cellar. I quickly grabbed some of it and flung it over my shoulder to ward off bad luck, but Miss Watson beat me to it and stopped me.

"You're making a mess again, Huckleberry!" she said. "Take your hands away."

The widow put in a good word for me, but it wasn't going to change my fate. I felt worried and shaky after breakfast and wondered what kind of trouble this bad luck had in store for me.

There are some kinds of bad luck that you can avoid, but this was one of those kinds. So I just trudged along, feeling low and on edge.

I went out into the front garden and climbed over the stile at the fence. The ground was covered in a thin layer of new snow, and I saw someone's tracks leading up from the quarry.

They had stood around the stile for a while before moving on around the fence. It seemed strange that they hadn't come inside after standing there so long. I was curious but couldn't make sense of it.

I decided to follow their tracks, but first I examined them more closely. At first, I didn't notice anything unusual, but then I saw something odd - a cross made with big nails in the left boot heel.

I was up in an instant and started running down the hill. Every now and then I'd glance over my shoulder, but I didn't see anyone. I arrived at Judge Thatcher's place as fast as I could.

Judge Thatcher looked at me and said: "You're out of breath! Did you come to collect your interest?"

"No, sir," I replied. "Is there any for me?"

"Yes, a half-yearly payment is due - over $150. That's a lot of money for you. You'd be wise to let me handle it along with the other six thousand dollars."

"I don't want to spend it, sir," I said. "I don't need it at all – nor the six thousand. Give it to you instead. Take care of it – that's what I want."

The judge looked surprised and asked: "What do you mean?"

"Just take it without asking any questions," I told him. "You'll know better than to ask."

He replied: "I'm a bit puzzled. Is something wrong?"

"Please just take it," I said, "and don't ask me anything – that way I won't have to lie."

The judge studied the situation for a moment and then said: "Ah-ha! I think I understand. You want to sell all your property to me, not give it away."

He wrote some notes on a piece of paper, read them over, and said: "See? It says 'for a consideration.' That means you sold it to me for money. Here's $1 for you – now sign this."

I signed the papers and left.

Miss Watson's dog, Jim, had a huge hairball the size of a fist. He had gotten it from an ox and claimed to use magic with it. According to him, there was a spirit inside it that knew everything.

That night, I went to see him because I'd found his tracks in the snow. "Pap's here again," I said, but I wasn't sure what he wanted or if he would stay. Jim pulled out his hairball and muttered some words over it. Then he held it up and dropped it on the floor. It landed solidly and only rolled an inch.

Jim tried it again and again, but it didn't work that time either. He got down on his knees, put his ear against the hairball, and listened. "It won't talk," he said. Sometimes, it wouldn't respond to anyone, not even with money.

I told him I had a worthless coin with exposed brass that would never pass as real. It felt greasy, so even if you tried to use it, people would notice. Jim sniffed the coin, bit it, and rubbed it, trying to convince the hairball it was good. He said he'd stick the quarter between two slices of raw potato overnight, and by morning, it wouldn't feel greasy anymore.

He claimed that when you woke up, nobody in town would even suspect a thing about the fake coin. I knew potatoes could make things like this happen before, but I had forgotten.

Jim put the quarter under a hairball, and then got down again to listen. 
This time he said the hairball was fine. He said it would tell me everything 
about my future if I wanted it to. I asked him to go on. So the hairball talked to Jim, 
and Jim told it to me.

"Your old father doesn't know what's going to happen," Jim said. 
"He sometimes thinks he'll leave, then again he thinks he'll stay." 
The best thing is to be easy and let the old man do his own thing. 
There are two angels watching over him. One of them is white and shiny, 
and the other one is black. The white angel helps him for a little while, 
then the black angel comes in and knocks everything off track. 
It's hard to tell which one is guiding him at the end.

But you're going to be okay," Jim said. "You'll have big problems, 
but also big joys." Sometimes you'll get hurt, sometimes you'll get sick. 
But every time, you'll get better again. There are two women flying over your life. 
One of them is light and the other one is dark. One of them is rich and the other one is poor.

You're going to marry the poor one first and then the rich one," Jim said. 
"You should stay away from trouble as much as you can, because it's in the bills that you'll get hurt."
