We walked quietly along a path between the trees back towards Miss Watson's garden. We were being careful not to touch any branches with our heads as we made our way back. When we passed by the kitchen, I tripped over a root and made a noise. We crouched down and stopped moving.

Miss Watson's big black servant, Jim, was sitting in the kitchen doorway. We could see him clearly because there was light behind him. He stood up and stretched his neck out for a minute, listening. Then he asked:

"Who's there?"

He listened some more before coming quietly down to stand right between us. We were almost touching him. There was complete silence for what felt like minutes. I had an itch on my ankle that I couldn't scratch, but I didn't want to make any noise. Then I started itching all over - my ear and back, too. It felt like I was going to die from the itching.

I've noticed this before. If you're with your family or at a funeral or trying to sleep when you shouldn't be sleeping - if you're in a place where scratching won't do - you'll itch everywhere. Pretty soon Jim said:

"Say, who are you? Where are you? Oh my cats, I didn't hear anything. I'm going to sit down and listen again."

He sat down on the ground between me and Tom. He leaned his back against a tree and stretched out his legs, one of them touching mine. My nose started to itch. It itched so much that tears began to well up in my eyes. But I didn't scratch - something held me back. The itching moved inside, then under my skin, and soon I was itching all over again. This discomfort lasted for what felt like six or seven minutes, but it seemed way longer than that. I was itching in eleven different places by the time it ended. I thought I couldn't take it anymore, but I clenched my teeth hard and tried to stay still. Just as I was getting ready to give up, Jim started breathing heavily, then snoring softly. Suddenly, I felt comfortable again.

Tom made me a sign - a tiny noise with his mouth - and we started sneaking away on our bellies. We were about ten feet away when Tom whispered to me, and he wanted to tie Jim up to the tree for fun. I said no; if Jim woke up, it would make a mess, and they'd find out I wasn't there. Then Tom said he was running out of candles, so he slipped into the kitchen to get some more.

I didn't want him to try that again. I told him that Jim might wake up at any moment, but Tom insisted on going back. So we snuck in and got three candles, and Tom left five cents on the table for pay. We had to get out of there quickly, but Tom just had to crawl over to where Jim was lying on his belly, and play something on him. I waited, and it felt like a long time - everything was so quiet and lonely.

As soon as Tom returned, we started walking along the path around the garden fence.

We walked until we reached the top of the hill on the other side of the house. Tom said that while they were there, he accidentally knocked off Jim's hat and hung it on a branch right above him.

Jim didn't wake up. Later, Jim said that some witches had cast a spell on him and taken him for a ride all around the state. They then set him back down under the trees and left his hat hanging from a limb as proof.

The next time Jim told the story, he claimed they took him to New Orleans. Then, every time he shared it, he exaggerated more and more, until he said that witches had taken him on a trip all around the world. He even claimed his back was severely sore from being ridden so hard. Jim became very proud of this story and started ignoring other black people.

Many black people would come from far away just to hear Jim tell about it, and they looked up to him more than anyone else in that area. Some white strangers would gather around, mesmerized, as if he was a wonder. 

In their conversations, black people often talked about witches hiding by the kitchen fire at night; however, whenever someone started talking about such things, Jim would interrupt with "Hmm, what do you really know about witches?" and that person would be silenced.

Jim always wore a five-cent piece around his neck on a string, claiming it was a charm given to him by the devil himself. He said he could cure anyone with it and summon witches whenever he wanted, but never revealed what words to use.

Many people offered Jim anything they had just for a glimpse of that five-cent piece; however, none of them dared touch it because they believed the devil had once held their hands when giving it to him. As a result, Jim became nearly unmanageable as a servant because his pride had grown due to encountering the devil and being ridden by witches.

Here's the rewritten passage:

When Tom and I reached the top of the hill, we looked away from the village below. We could see a few lights twinkling - maybe it was where some sick people lived. The stars above were sparkling beautifully. Down by the village, there was a wide river that stretched for a mile in every direction. It was so still and grand.

We headed down the hill and found Jo Harper and Ben Rogers, along with a few more boys, hiding in an old barn. We untied a small boat and rowed it downstream for two and a half miles to where there was a big scar on the hillside. Then we got out of the water and walked ashore.

We gathered around some bushes, and Tom told everyone to promise not to tell anyone about what we were doing. He showed them a hole in the ground, hidden among the bushes. We lit some candles, and crawled inside on our hands and knees. We moved about 200 yards, and then the cave opened up. Tom searched through the passages and soon discovered a small wall that had a hidden opening. We made our way through a narrow tunnel and entered a damp, cold room.

Tom said:

"Now, let's start this band of robbers and call it Tom Sawyer's Gang. If you want to join, you have to promise an oath and write your name in blood."

Everyone agreed to the rules.

Tom pulled out a sheet of paper with the oath written on it and read it aloud. The oath promised that every boy in the band would never betray each other or reveal their secrets. If someone broke this promise, they would have to kill the person who had betrayed them and their family. This was seen as a very serious threat, and the person who had broken the rules would suffer severe punishment, including death.

The oath also stated that anyone outside of the band who used the secret symbol would be sued and possibly killed. Breaking this rule again would result in even harsher punishment.

If someone from the band told secrets, they would be punished severely: their throat would be cut, and then their body would be burned and their ashes scattered. Their name would be erased from the list of band members, and a curse would be placed upon them, making them disappear forever.

Everyone thought it was beautiful and impressive. Tom claimed that some parts of it were his own idea, but most came from pirate stories and tales of outlaws.

Some people suggested killing the families of boys who broke the rules. Tom agreed, so he added this to the oath using a pencil. Then Ben Rogers spoke up:

"Look at Huck Finn - he's never had any family; what about him?"

Tom replied: "Doesn't he have a father?"

Here's the rewritten text:

"Yeah, he has a father, but you can't find him anymore. He used to drink with the pigs in the slaughterhouse, but he hasn't been seen here for over a year."

They discussed it and decided that I shouldn't join because they said every boy needs a family or someone to take care of them, so it wouldn't be fair. But nobody had any ideas - everyone was stuck and quiet. I was about to cry, but then I thought of something and came up with a plan.

"I can do this," I said. "You can kill Miss Watson instead." Everyone agreed:

"That's okay, that's fine. Huck can come in too."

Then they made a mark on the paper with a pin to get some blood to sign it. I put my signature on the paper.

"Okay, what's our business?" Ben Rogers asked.

"We're not doing anything, just robbery and murder," Tom replied.

"But who are we going to rob? Houses, cattle, or -"

"Duh! Stealing cattle isn't robbery, that's burglary," Tom said. "We're highwaymen. We stop stages and carriages on the road with masks on, kill people, and take their watches and money."

"Do we have to kill people?"

"Yeah, it's best. Some people think differently, but most agree it's better - except for some we bring to this cave and keep them till they're ransomed."

"What's ransom?"

"I don't know. But that's what they do. I've read about it in books, so that's what we have to do."

"But how can we do that if we don't know what it is?"

"Why, let's face it - we have to try this. Don't I tell you it's all in the instructions? Do you want to do things differently and make a mess of everything?"

"Oh, that sounds great, Tom Sawyer, but how are these people going to be released if we don't know how to do it right? That's what I'm getting at. Now, what do you think it is?"

"Well, I have no idea. Maybe if we keep them until they're ransomed, it means we keep them till they die."

"Exactly! Why couldn't you say that earlier? We'll keep them till they're released to death; and they'll be a real nuisance, eating everything and always trying to escape."

"How you talk, Ben Rogers. How can they escape when there's someone watching them 24/7?"

"A guard! That's good. So someone has to stay awake all night just to watch them. I think that's ridiculous. Why can't we just use a club and ransom them right away?"

"Because it's not in the book, that's why. Now, Ben Rogers, do you want to follow the rules or don't you? - that's what this is about. Don't you think the people who wrote the books know what's correct? Do you think you can learn from them? Not a chance. No way, we'll just do it the regular way."

"Alright. I don't mind, but I think it's a silly idea. Say, do we kill the women too?"

Note: Some minor rewording and phrasing changes were made to improve clarity and flow while preserving the original tone and narrative voice.

Here is the rewritten text:

"Well, Ben Rogers, if I was as clueless as you, I wouldn't pretend to know anything. Killing women? No one's ever seen that in books. You bring them to the cave, and you're always sweet to them - they fall in love with you and never want to leave."

"If that's how it is, but I don't believe it for a second. We'll have so many women in the cave and guys waiting to be rescued, there won't be room for anyone else. But go ahead, I'm not going to argue about it."

Tommy Barnes was fast asleep now, and when they woke him up, he was scared, sobbed, and wanted to go home to his mom - he didn't want to be a robber anymore.

They all teased him and called him a crybaby, which made him furious. He said he'd tell on them and reveal their secrets, but Tom gave him five cents to keep quiet and promised they'd meet again next week to rob someone and kill some people."

Ben Rogers said he couldn't leave much, only Sundays. So he wanted to start the next Sunday, but everyone thought it was a bad idea to rob on Sunday. That made up their minds. They decided to get together as soon as possible and choose a day. Then Tom Sawyer was elected captain and Jo Harper second in command of the Gang. We left home."

I climbed up onto the shed and crept into my window just before dawn broke. My new clothes were sticky with grease and clay, and I was exhausted.
