I got into trouble with old Miss Watson in the morning because of my clothes.

But then I met the widow, who didn't scold me - she just cleaned off the dirt and looked really sorry. That made me want to behave myself for a while if I could. 

Miss Watson took me into the closet and told me to pray every day. She said that no matter what I asked for, I would get it. But that wasn't true.

I tried it once, and I got a fish line, but no hooks. It was useless to me without hooks. I kept trying for hooks, but somehow I couldn't make it work.

A little while later, one day, I asked Miss Watson to help me with my prayer. She said I was being foolish and she wouldn't explain why.

At some point in my life, I sat down in the woods and thought deeply about it. I asked myself, if someone can get anything they truly want through prayer, why doesn't Deacon Winn get his money back from a failed pork business? Why can't the widow get her stolen silver snuffbox back? Why can't Miss Watson improve her health?

I told myself there wasn't anything in it. When I talked to the widow about this idea, she said what someone could achieve by praying for it was "spiritual gifts." This was a lot for me to handle, but she explained it to me - I needed to help others as much as possible and look out for them all the time, without ever thinking of myself. She meant that, including Miss Watson, in this.

I went back to the woods, thinking about what the widow said, but couldn't see any benefits from it - except when it came to helping others. So eventually I decided not to worry about it anymore and let it go. Sometimes the widow would talk about Providence in a way that made me want to shout with excitement, but Miss Watson would contradict her the next day.

I realized there were two different kinds of Providence, and if you went by the widow's one, you might have an advantage. But if you believed in Miss Watson's version, it wouldn't make any difference - it was like choosing a losing side. I thought this through, but still decided to align myself with the widow's idea, even though I wasn't sure how it would help me.

Pap hadn't been seen for over a year, and that suited me just fine.
I didn't want to see him anymore. He used to yell at me when he was sober,
and hit me whenever he could catch me. When he was around, I'd usually
head into the woods for safety. This time, though, people said they found
Pap floating in the river, about 12 miles above town.

They thought it might be him because he was roughly the same size and had
long hair, just like Pap's. But his face was hard to recognize - all
the water had distorted it. They said he was lying on his back in the
water when they pulled him out. They buried him on the riverbank.

But I wasn't feeling comfortable for long. Thinking about it, I knew
that a drowned person doesn't float on their back - they do on their face.
So that meant this couldn't be Pap after all. It was someone else,
dressed up as a man. That made me feel uncomfortable again.

Here's the rewritten passage:

We played "Robber" every now and then for about a month, and then I stopped playing too. Everyone else did. We never hurt anyone or robbed anyone, but we just pretended to be bandits.

We'd jump out of the woods and charge at horse-drawn carriages and women carrying vegetables to market, making them think they were under attack. But we never actually attacked them. Tom called the horses "ingots" and the turnips "julery", and we'd talk about what we had done in a secret cave.

One time, Tom said he had received secret information that a group of Spanish merchants and wealthy Arabs was coming to Cave Hollow with two hundred elephants, six hundred camels, and over a thousand mules loaded with precious jewels. We were supposed to lay in wait and attack them when they arrived, but I didn't believe it.

Tom kept his swords and guns all scoured up, even though we only used wooden sticks and broom handles. I thought it was pointless. But I wanted to see the elephants and camels, so I went along with it on Saturday. When we got into position, Tom shouted "ambuscade!" and we rushed out of the woods. But there were no Spanish merchants or Arabs. Instead, there was a Sunday school picnic.

We ended up chasing after kids, but all they had to offer us were some doughnuts and jam. Ben Rogers got a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn book and a tract. Then the teacher showed up and made us put everything away.

I didn't see any diamonds, and I told Tom Sawyer so. He said there were plenty of them anyway, and that there were Arabs, elephants, and more.
He also said there were hundreds of soldiers and treasure, but we had enemies that he called magicians.
They'd turned the whole place into an infant's Sunday school just to spite us. I agreed, then Tom Sawyer said what we should do was go after those magicians.
Tom said a magician could call up genies and they would destroy us like nothing. They're as tall as trees and big around as churches.

"Can't you get some genies on our side?" he asked. "We could defeat them easily."

"How are we going to get them?"

"I don't know, how do they get them?"

"Why, they rub an old lamp or a magic ring and the genies come running in, making lots of noise with thunder and lightning, and doing whatever they're told."
"They seem to be very powerful," I said.

"Who makes them so powerful?"

Here is the rewritten text:

"The magic belongs to whoever rubs the lamp or ring. If he tells them to do something crazy, like build a palace 40 miles long out of diamonds and fill it with chewing gum, they have to do it - and they have to do it by morning. And that's not all - they have to move the whole palace around wherever you want, no matter what."

"I think those people are nuts for doing his bidding instead of taking care of their own work," I said. "And if I was one of them, I'd rather talk to someone in Jericho than come to this old tin lamp guy just because he's rubbing it."

"Huck Finn, you're always saying something like that," the other man replied. "You'd have to come when he rubbed the lamp, no matter what."

"I'm not afraid of being told what to do - I'm a big kid, after all! If I had to choose, I'd still come, but I bet I could make the guy who's rubbing the lamp climb one of these tall trees anywhere in the country," I said.

"Hey, it doesn't matter what you say, Huck Finn. You just don't seem to know anything, somehow - you're as clueless as a saphead."

I thought about it for two or three days, and then I decided to check it out.
I got an old tin lamp and an iron ring, and headed into the woods.
I rubbed them together until I was soaked in sweat, thinking that if I
could just do this right, I'd build a palace and sell it. But nothing
happened - no genies appeared. So then I figured it was all just a joke,
one of Tom Sawyer's tall tales. I don't believe in magic like the A-rabs
and elephants do. It looked more like something from a Sunday school story.
