"Hey, what's going on?"

I opened my eyes and looked around. It was morning already, and I had been sleeping for hours. My dad was standing over me, looking unhappy.

"What were you doing with that gun?" he asked sternly.

"I didn't know anything about it," I replied. "Somebody tried to break in, so I was defending myself."

"Why didn't you wake me up?"

"I tried, but you weren't moving," I said. "I couldn't get you to wake up even if I wanted to."

"Come on, let's not stand around all day. Let's go see what's going on by the river. I'll be right behind you."

My dad unlocked the door, and I quickly cleared out our little spot on the riverbank. We saw some pieces of wood and branches floating down, and a few scraps of bark. This told me that the river had started to rise. If I was in town, it would be a great opportunity for us. The June flood was always good luck for us - when the water rises, you can catch all sorts of valuable debris like cordwood and logs. We could sell them to the wood yards and sawmill.

I walked along the bank, keeping an eye out for trouble and looking around to see what would happen if I got caught. Suddenly, a canoe appeared - it was beautiful, about 13-14 feet long, and looked like it was floating on water. Without hesitation, I jumped off the bank headfirst, still wearing my clothes, and started paddling towards the canoe.

I assumed there'd be someone hiding in it to trick me, but this time it was different. The canoe was a driftboat, and I climbed inside and paddled her ashore. To myself, I thought that this old man would be glad when he saw what I found - she's worth $10. But when I got to shore, my pap wasn't in sight yet.

As I was trying to find a place to hide the canoe, I had another idea: instead of running off into the woods, I'd make camp downriver for a while and see if that would be easier than trudging through on foot. The spot looked like it was almost near our shanty, but every time I thought I heard him coming, he wasn't there.

I finally got her hidden, then walked around a bunch of willows to take a look around. That's when I saw the old man down the path, about 20 feet away, holding his gun and aiming at a bird.

When we were getting along, I was busy setting up a fishing line.
He teased me a bit for being slow, but I told him I had fallen into
the river and that's why I was taking so long. He would have known I
was wet, and then he would ask questions. We caught five catfish off the
lines and went home.

After breakfast, we lay down to rest and sleep some more. Both of us
were pretty exhausted. I started thinking about how to keep my parents
and the widow from following me. It was a much safer idea than relying
on luck to get far enough away before they caught up with me.

I didn't think of anything right away, but then my dad had an idea when
he got up for another drink. He said:

"If someone starts looking around here again, I'll wake you up. That person
wasn't there for any good reason. Next time, if that happens, you hear me?"

He fell asleep again, but what he said made me realize exactly what I
needed to do. Now I can fix it so nobody will think of following me.

About twelve o'clock we left and headed up the bank. The river was rising quickly, with lots of driftwood floating by. A little while later, a part of a log raft appeared - nine logs tied together.

We went out in the skiff and towed it to shore. Then we had lunch. Anyone but Pap would have waited until the end of the day to catch more stuff; but that wasn't Pap's style. Nine logs was enough for one trip, so he decided to head straight into town to sell them. He locked me inside and took the skiff, leaving around half-past three.

I thought I'd see him back tonight, but he didn't come. After waiting until I knew he had a good head start, I went out with my saw and started working on that log again. By the time I was done, Pap and his raft were just a small speck on the water, far away from where they had started.

I took a bag of cornmeal to where my canoe was hidden, pushed aside some vines and branches, and put it in. Then I did the same with the side of bacon and the whisky jug.

Next, I filled up as much coffee and sugar as we had. I grabbed all our ammunition, wadding, bucket, gourd, dipper, tin cup, saw, two blankets, skillet, and coffee pot. I even took fish lines, matches, and other stuff that was worth anything. 

I cleaned out the place completely. There wasn't an axe in sight, just one at the woodpile. I knew why I didn't want to take it with me.

I went back for my gun, and that's all done.

After crawling out of the hole and dragging everything outside, I made a quick fix from the outside by covering up any smooth spots with dust. Then I put a piece of log back in its place, propped it up with two rocks under one side and against another side to hold it steady. It wasn't noticeable unless you looked really close - this was the back of the cabin anyway, so nobody would mess around there.

I looked around to make sure there were no footprints on the grass. I stood up and took a good look at the river.

The water was calm and peaceful. I felt safe to move around. So, I grabbed my gun and walked into the woods for some bird hunting. As I wandered through the underbrush, I spotted a wild pig. It was clear that the pigs in this area had escaped from farms on the prairie.

I shot the pig and took it back to camp. When we got there, I started breaking down the door with an axe. It wasn't easy, but I managed to chip away at it. Once the door was open, I fetched the pig and carried him almost all the way to the table. With a few swift strokes of the axe, I cut his throat and let him bleed on the ground.

I used an old sack and filled it with big rocks, then started dragging the pig back down into the woods. As I pulled, the rocks would roll around inside the bag. Once I reached the river, I tossed the pig into the water and watched as it sank out of sight.

It was pretty obvious that someone had dragged a heavy object over the ground. I wished Tom Sawyer were here - he'd have added some flair to this job, like always. He could have come up with clever ways to dispose of the body without leaving any signs behind.

Here is the rewritten text:

I had just pulled out some of my hair and cleaned the axe well. I stuck it on the back side and threw it in the corner. Then I picked up the pig and held him against my chest with my jacket, so he wouldn't drip blood everywhere. I waited until we were below the house before dumping him into the river.

I thought for a moment. So I went to get a bag of meal and my old saw from the canoe. I carried them back to the house and put the sack in the spot where it used to be. Then I ripped a hole in the bottom with the saw because there weren't any knives or forks on the place.

I took the sack across the grass and through the willows that grow east of the house, to a shallow lake that's five miles wide and full of rushes and ducks. There was a slough leading out of it on the other side that went miles away, but I didn't know where it went. However, it wasn't connected to the river.

As I walked along, I noticed that the meal had made a little trail all the way to the lake. I dropped pap's whetstone there too, so it looked like someone had accidentally done it. Then I tied up the hole in the sack with a string and headed back to the canoe with my saw.

It was getting dark now. I dropped my canoe into the river under some trees that hung over the bank, and waited for the moon to rise. 

I made fast to a tree; then I took a bite to eat, and eventually laid down in the canoe to smoke a pipe and plan what to do. To myself, I thought, "They'll follow the path of those rocks to the shore, drag the river, and go hunting for me along that meal track to find the robbers who killed me and stole my stuff." They won't ever search the river for anything else but my dead body. They'll get tired soon and leave me alone.

All right; I can stop anywhere I want. Jackson's Island is good enough for me, as I know it well, and no one ever visits there. And then I can paddle to town at night, sneak around, and take whatever I need. Jackson's Island is my place.

I was very tired, and the next thing I knew, I was asleep. When I woke up, I had no idea where I was for a moment. I stood up and looked around, feeling a little scared. Then I remembered. The river stretched out as far as the eye could see. The moon shone brightly; I could count the drifting logs hundreds of yards away, black and motionless. Everything was silent, late, and smelled late.

You know what I mean?

I took a break and stretched, and was about to start paddling when I heard a sound coming from across the water. I listened closely. It wasn't long before I made it out.

The sound was familiar - that steady rhythmic noise you get from oars working in the rowlocks on a calm night. I peeked through the willow branches and there it was: a small boat heading straight for me. I couldn't see how many people were in it, but as it got closer, I realized it was just one person.

I wondered if it might be my friend, Pap, who had been expected to meet me. But when he paddled beneath the water and then popped up on the shore, I could see that it wasn't him. He seemed sober too, judging by how carefully he laid his oars in the water.

I didn't waste any time. The next minute I was spinning downstream quickly but quietly in the shade of the bank. I paddled for about two and a half miles before turning towards the middle of the river, because I wanted to avoid people who might see me and shout my name.

As I got further out into the open water, I spotted some driftwood and decided to stop paddling. I lay down in the canoe and let it float, feeling the warm sun on my skin.

I lay there, feeling refreshed after a good rest and a smoke from my pipe. I gazed up at the sky - it looked incredibly vast when you're lying on your back in the moonlight. I'd never noticed that before.

As I listened to the sounds of people talking at the ferry landing, I could hear every word they said. One man joked that it was getting close to longer days and shorter nights, but another guy told him that this wasn't one of those short ones, and they both laughed about it again. When another guy joined in on the conversation, he grew serious and told them to leave him alone. The first guy thought his old woman would find their jokes entertaining, but said they weren't as funny as some of the things he'd said before.

One man estimated that it was nearly three o'clock, and hoped daylight wouldn't arrive for at least another week. As we chatted further away from each other, I couldn't make out what they were saying anymore, just the occasional mumble or laugh carried on the wind.

I moved down to the riverbank below the ferry. Rising up again, I saw Jackson's Island looming in front of me - it was about two and a half miles downstream, surrounded by heavy timber that stood upright out of the middle of the river. The island looked massive and dark, like a ship without any lights. There were no signs of the bar at the head of the river; it had all been submerged underwater.

It didn't take me long to get there. I paddled past the head of the river at a good pace, and then I drifted into still water and landed on the Illinois shore. I had to push aside some overhanging branches to get into the canoe; it was just big enough for me. 

When I got in, nobody could see us from the outside because we were hidden behind the branches.

I climbed out of the canoe and sat down on a log at the head of the island. From there, I looked out across the river and saw the black wood logs floating downstream. In the distance, I could see three or four lights twinkling in the town, about three miles away. A huge lumber raft was coming towards us from upstream, with a lantern in the middle.

As it got closer, I heard someone say, "Steady oars, turn her head to starboard!" The voice sounded right beside me.

The sky had started to lighten now, so I decided to take a nap before breakfast.
