You don't know about me unless you've read "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" by Mark Twain. That book is basically true - mostly true, anyway. It did get some details changed, but that's not a big deal.

I never met anyone who didn't lie sometimes without being Aunt Polly, the widow, or Mary. They're all featured in that book, which is pretty accurate with some exaggerations. 

So, here's what happened: Tom and me found the money the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us super rich. We got $6,000 each, all in gold. It was a huge amount of money when we saw it.

Judge Thatcher took the money and invested it, earning us about $1 per day for the whole year - more than anyone knew what to do with. The Widow Douglas took me under her wing, saying she'd teach me to behave, but living with her was tough because she was so proper and decent all the time. Eventually, I couldn't take it anymore, so I left.

I went back to my old clothes and felt free again. But then Tom found me and said he wanted to start a gang of robbers, and I could join if I helped him become respectable again. So, I went back to the widow's house.

A widow cried over me and called me lots of silly names, but she never meant to hurt my feelings.
She dressed me up again, and I felt hot and uncomfortable. 

Then the old routine started all over again. The widow rang a bell to signal that it was time for supper.
When we sat down at the table, I couldn't eat right away because the widow had to finish eating first.

She would grumble a bit about the food, but to be honest, it wasn't that great.
The problem was that everything was cooked separately, so there wasn't much flavor in each dish.
It's different when you're rummaging through a barrel of leftovers - things get mixed up and it tastes better.

After supper, the widow pulled out her book and told me about Moses and the bulrushes.
I was really interested at first, but soon realized that Moses had been dead for a long time.

I started feeling like smoking again and asked the widow if I could. But she refused. She said it was a bad habit and wasn't clean, and that I should try not to do it anymore.

That's how some people are - they get upset about things they don't understand. Here she was worrying about Moses, who had nothing to do with her life, and criticizing me for something I was doing that had its benefits. It seemed strange that she found so much fault in me when she herself used snuff - after all, it wasn't like she'd ever tried smoking.

Her sister, Miss Watson, a somewhat slender old woman with goggles on,
had just moved in with her, and now she was giving me a hard time.
She spent about an hour trying to teach me how to spell, but then the
widow told her to take it easy. I couldn't take it anymore.

For another hour, we did nothing at all. Miss Watson would tell me,
"Stop putting your feet on that chair," and "Stand up straight." She'd say,
"Don't slouch like that, or make a silly face."

Then she started talking about the bad place, and I said I wished
I was there. But she got really upset with me. All I wanted was to get
away somewhere, to have a change of pace. I wasn't picky.

She told me it was wrong to say that, that she wouldn't say it even if
she could. She wanted to live so well that she'd go to the good place.
But I couldn't see why that was better than where we were. So I made up my mind not to try for it.

Now that she had made the decision, she told me all about it.
She said people would have to spend their whole day playing music with a harp
and singing forever if they went there. So I didn't think much of it.
But I never expressed my opinion. I asked her if Tom Sawyer would go
there too, and she said no way at all. I was happy about that because
I really wanted us to be together.

Miss Watson kept looking at me and it started to feel annoying and sad.
Eventually, they brought in the other kids and we had prayers. After that,
everyone went to bed. I went up to my room with a candle and put it on
the table. Then I sat down in a chair by the window and tried to think of
something happy, but it wasn't going to work. I felt so lonely that I
really wanted to be dead.

The stars were shining, and the leaves were rustling in the woods very sadly.
I heard an owl calling out about someone who had died, and a bird crying
about someone else who was going to die. The wind was trying to tell me
something, but I couldn't hear it properly. It made my skin feel cold.

Suddenly, I heard a strange sound coming from the woods that sounded like
a ghost trying to say something. I felt really scared and sad because I
wanted someone to be with me. A spider crawled up my shoulder, and when
I flicked it away, it fell into the candle and got all shriveled up.

I didn't need anyone to tell me that this was a bad sign - it meant bad luck.
So I was really scared and started shaking all over. I went back and forth
in front of my bed three times, crossed myself every time, and then tied
a lock of hair with a thread to keep witches away. But I wasn't sure if
it would work.

People do that when they find something lucky, but I had never heard anyone
say it could protect you from bad luck by getting rid of a spider.

I sat down again, shaking all over, and got out my pipe to have a smoke.
The house was completely silent now, so the widow wouldn't know anything.

After a while, I heard the clock in town striking twelve - boom-boom-boom. Then everything went quiet again.

Pretty soon, I heard a twig snap in the darkness among the trees.
Something was moving around. I stopped and listened carefully.

I could just hear a faint meowing sound coming from down there.
That sounded good! "Meow!" I whispered softly back, trying to mimic the sound.
I blew out the light and scrambled out of the window onto the shed.
Then I slipped down to the ground and crawled among the trees. And there he was - Tom Sawyer waiting for me.
