In the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat trap. We carried it back and set it in the best rat hole. Within an hour we had caught fifteen of the biggest rats. Then we put the trap in a safe place under Aunt Sally’s bed.

While we were away, little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Alexander Phelps found the trap. He opened it to see if any rats would come out, and they did. Aunt Sally came in, and when we returned she was standing on the bed, shouting. The rats tried to hide from her. She dusted both of us with powder, and we spent about two hours catching another fifteen or sixteen rats, cursing that meddlesome cub. They weren’t as good as the first batch, because the first haul had been the best of the lot. I have never seen a better group of rats than that first catch.

We had a great collection of sorted spiders, bugs, frogs, caterpillars, and other things. We wanted a hornet’s nest, but we didn’t get one. The family stayed at home. We didn’t leave right away; we stayed with them as long as we could because we thought we might tire them out or they might tire us out, and they did.

Then we used some ointment and rubbed it on the affected areas. We felt almost completely fine again, but we couldn’t settle down comfortably. So we went after the snakes. We caught a couple of dozen garter snakes and house snakes, put them in a bag, and put the bag in our room. By then it was dinner time, and it had been a solid day’s work. Hungry? No, I don’t think so!

When we went back, there wasn’t a single snake left. We hadn’t tied the sack tightly, and the snakes found a way out and escaped. It didn’t matter much, though, because snakes were still around the house somewhere. We thought we could catch more. In fact, there was never a shortage of snakes near the house for a long time. You would see them dangling from the rafters or hiding in corners now and then; they often landed on your plate or on the back of your neck, usually when you didn’t want them.

They were pretty and striped, and having a lot of them wasn’t a problem, but that didn’t change Aunt Sally’s mind. She hated snakes, no matter what kind, and she couldn’t stand them at all. Whenever one fell on her, she would stop whatever she was doing and run away. I had never seen a woman like her. She would scream so loudly it sounded like someone shouting “Jericho.” You couldn’t persuade her to pick one up with tongs. If she turned over and found a snake in her bed, she would jump out and scream as if the house were on fire. She upset the old man so much that he said he wished snakes had never been created.

Even after every snake had been cleared out of the house for a whole week, Aunt Sally was still not over it. She was still jumpy; if you touched the back of her neck with a feather while she was thinking, she would jump right out of her stockings. It was very odd. But Tom said all women were like that. He said they were made that way for some reason.

We were beaten every time one of our snakes got in her way. She said those beatings were nothing compared to what she would do if we ever put the snakes back there. I didn’t mind the beatings because they didn’t mean much, but I did mind the trouble of moving everything to a new place. We finally settled the snakes there and took care of everything else. You never see a cabin as happy as Jim’s was when everyone swarmed out for music and chased him. Jim didn’t like the spiders, and the spiders didn’t like Jim. They stayed near him and made it very warm. He said that with the rats, the snakes and the grindstone there was hardly any room in the bed for him. When there was space, nobody could sleep because it was always noisy. They never all slept at the same time; they took turns. When the snakes slept, the rats were on the deck; when the rats turned, the snakes kept watch. So he always had one group under him and another group making a mess over him. If he got up to look for a new place, the spiders would try to attack him as he crossed. He said that if he ever got out this time, he would never be a prisoner again, not even for a salary.

By the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape. The shirt was sent early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his journal while the ink was still fresh. The pens were made, and the inscriptions were carved on the grindstone. The bed‑leg was sawed in two, and we spread the sawdust, which gave us a terrible stomach ache. We thought we were all going to die, but we didn’t. It was the most indigestible sawdust I have ever seen, and Tom felt the same.  

But as I was saying, we had finally finished all the work. We were all very tired, especially Jim. The old man had written a couple of times to the plantation near New Orleans asking them to come and get their runaway black worker, but he never got an answer because such a plantation did not exist. So he decided to advertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans newspapers. When he mentioned the St. Louis papers it gave me cold shivers, and I realized we had no time to lose. Then Tom said, “Now for the anonymous letters.”  

“What are those?” I asked.  

“Warnings to people that something is happening. Sometimes they are sent one way, sometimes another. There is always someone watching who informs the governor of the castle. When Louis XVI was about to leave the Tuileries, a servant girl did it. It’s a very good method, and so are anonymous letters. We’ll use both. It is also common for a prisoner’s mother to trade clothes with him; she stays inside while he slips out in her clothes. We’ll do that, too.”

“Look, Tom, why should we warn anyone that something is happening? Let them discover it themselves—it’s their responsibility.

“Yes, I understand, but we can’t rely on them. From the start they have left us to do everything. They are so trusting and clueless that they notice nothing. If we don’t give them a warning, no one will be able to interfere with us, and after all our hard work this escape will go smoothly; it won’t matter to them.

“Well, Tom, that’s exactly what I want.

“Damn!” he said, looking disgusted. I replied:

“I’m not going to complain. Whatever works for you works for me. What are we going to do about the servant girl?”

“You’ll be her. You’ll slip in at night and take that yellow girl’s dress.”

“Tom, that will cause trouble in the morning because, of course, she probably doesn’t have any other clothes.”

“I know, but you only need fifteen minutes to carry the secret letter and leave it under the front door.”

“All right, I’ll do it, but I could also hide it in my own clothes.”

“You wouldn’t look like a servant girl then, would you?”

“No, but nobody will see what I look like anyway.”

“That doesn’t matter. We just have to do our duty and not worry about whether anyone sees us. Do you have any principle at all?”

“Fine, I’m not denying anything; I’m the servant girl. Who is Jim’s mother?”

I’m his mother. I’ll get a dress from Aunt Sally.  

“Then you’ll have to stay in the cabin when Jim and I leave.”  

“Not much. I’ll fill Jim’s clothes with straw and put them on his bed to stand in for his mother in disguise. Jim will take the woman’s dress off me and wear it. Then we’ll all escape together. When a prisoner of style escapes, it’s called an evasion. It’s always called that when a king escapes, for example. The same thing applies to a king’s son; it doesn’t matter whether he’s legitimate or not.”  

So Tom wrote the anonymous letter, and I took the yellow woman’s dress that night. I put it on and slid it under the front door, just as Tom told me to. It said:  

“Beware. Trouble is brewing. Keep a sharp lookout.” UNKNOWN FRIEND.

The next night we put up a picture that Tom had drawn in blood—a skull and crossbones—on the front door. The night after that we hung another picture, this one of a coffin, on the back door. I have never seen a family so scared. They could not have been more frightened if the house were full of ghosts hiding behind everything, under the beds, and drifting through the air.

Whenever a door slammed, Aunt Sally jumped and shouted “ouch!” When anything fell, she jumped and shouted “ouch!” If you touched her while she wasn’t looking, she reacted the same way. She could never feel calm because she always thought something was behind her. So she kept spinning around suddenly, saying “ouch,” and before she was finished she would spin back again and say it once more. She was afraid to go to bed, but she couldn’t fall asleep.

Tom said the trick was working very well. He said he had never seen anything work more satisfactorily. He said it showed that everything had been done right.

Then he said, “Now for the big plan!” The very next morning, at dawn, we prepared another letter and wondered what to do with it, because we had heard at dinner that they were going to keep a Black man on watch at both doors all night. Tom went down the roof to look around, and the man at the back door was asleep. Tom stuck a knife in the back of his neck and came back. The letter said:

Don't betray me; I want to be your friend. A desperate gang of cutthroats from the Indian Territory plans to steal your runaway Black man tonight. They have been trying to scare you so you will stay in the house and not interfere. I am one of the gang members, but I have become religious and want to quit and live an honest life again. I will betray their evil plan.

The gang will sneak in from the north, along the fence, at exactly midnight. They will use a false key to get into the man's cabin. I am supposed to stay nearby and blow a tin horn if I see any danger. Instead, I will act like a sheep as soon as they get inside and will not blow at all.

While they are loosening his chains, you can slip in, lock the gang members up, and kill them when you want. Do exactly what I tell you. If you do something else, they will become suspicious and cause a big uproar. I don't want any reward, only to know I have done the right thing.

UNKNOWN FRIEND
