Making those pens was a very hard job, and the saw was hard too. Jim thought the inscription would be the hardest part. That is the writing the prisoner must carve on the wall. He had to do it; Tom said he had to. No state prisoner ever failed to carve his inscription and his coat of arms.  

“Look at Lady Jane Grey,” he says. “Look at Gilford Dudley. Look at old Northumberland! Why, Huck, do you think it’s such a big problem? What are you going to do? How will you get around it? Jim has to make his inscription and his coat of arms. They all have to.”  

Jim says: “Well, Tom, I don’t have a coat of arms. I have nothing but an old shirt, and you know I have to keep the journal on that.”  

“Oh, you don’t understand, Jim; a coat of arms is something different.”  

“Okay,” I say, “Jim is right when he says he doesn’t have a coat of arms, because he really doesn’t.”  

“I think I knew that,” Tom says, “but I bet he’ll get one before he leaves—because he’s leaving properly, and there won’t be any mistakes in his record.”  

So while Jim and I each filed the pens—Jim using brass and I using a spoon—Tom began to design the coat of arms. After a while he said he had created so many good designs that he could barely choose one. He says:

On the shield we’ll have a gold diagonal stripe on the right side, a dark red X‑shaped cross in the middle, a lying dog as a common symbol, and under the dog’s foot a chain with a battlement shape that represents slavery. There will also be a green chevron in the top part with a wavy edge, three wavy lines on a blue background, and the central points standing up on a jagged indented line. The crest is a runaway slave, black, carrying a bundle over his shoulder on a left‑leaning bar. The two red supporters are you and me. The motto is “Maggiore fretta, minore atto.” I got it from a book—it means the more haste, the less speed.

“Goodness,” I say, “but what does the rest mean?”

“We don’t have time to bother with that,” he says. “We have to get started like everyone else.”

“Well, anyway,” I say, “what’s some of it? What’s a fess?”

“A fess… you don’t need to know what a fess is. I’ll show him how to make it when he gets there.”

“Thanks, Tom,” I say, “but I think you could explain it. What’s a bar sinister?”

“I don’t know. But he has to have it. All the nobles do.”

That’s just how he talks. If he didn’t feel like explaining something, he wouldn’t. You could ask him for a week and it wouldn’t change anything.

He had finished the coat‑of‑arms part, so he moved on to the next task: planning a sad inscription that Jim needed, just like everyone else. He made up a lot, wrote it down, and read it out loud:

1. Here a captive heart broken.

2. Here a poor prisoner, abandoned by the world and friends, lived a sorrowful life.  

3. Here a lonely heart broke, and a tired spirit rested after thirty‑seven years of solitary captivity.  

4. Here, homeless and friendless, after thirty‑seven years of bitter captivity, a noble stranger, the natural son of Louis XIV, died.  

Tom’s voice trembled as he read them, and he almost broke down. When he finished, he could not decide which one Jim should carve on the wall. They were all so good. At last he decided to let Jim carve all of them.  

Jim said it would take him a year to carve so much work on the logs with a nail, and he did not know how to make letters. Tom offered to block out the letters for him, so Jim would only have to follow the lines.  

Then Tom said:  

“Now that I think about it, the logs won’t work; there are no log walls in a dungeon. We have to carve the inscriptions into a rock. We’ll get a rock.”  

Jim thought the rock was worse than the logs. He said it would take him such a long time to carve into a rock that he would never finish. Tom said he would help him. He then looked at how Jim and I were getting along with the pens. It was annoying, tedious, hard work and very slow, and it gave my hands no chance to heal from the sores, and we seemed to make hardly any progress, so Tom said:

I know how to fix it. We need a stone for the coat of arms and the sad inscriptions, and we can do two jobs with the same stone. There is a large, flashy grindstone at the mill. We’ll take it, carve the designs on it, and also make the pens and the saw from it.

It wasn’t a bad idea, and the grindstone wasn’t useless either, so we decided to try it. It wasn’t midnight yet, so we left for the mill, leaving Jim at work. We lifted the grindstone and started rolling it home, but it was a very hard job. Sometimes, no matter what we did, we couldn’t keep it from tipping over, and it almost crushed us each time. Tom said it would surely get one of us before we finished. We got it halfway, then we were completely exhausted and drenched in sweat. We realized it was pointless, so we went to fetch Jim. He lifted his bed, took the chain off a leg, and wrapped it around his neck. We crawled out through our opening down there. Jim and I lifted the grindstone and moved it easily, while Tom supervised. He could supervise any boy I have ever seen. He knew how to do everything.

Our hole was pretty big, but it wasn’t big enough for the grindstone to get through. Jim took a pick and soon made the hole big enough. Then Tom marked the spots on it with a nail and gave Jim a nail to use as a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbish in the lean‑to as a hammer. He told Jim to work until his candle burned out, then he could go to bed, hide the grindstone under his straw, and sleep on it. We helped Jim fix his chain back on the bed‑leg, and we were ready for bed ourselves.  

But Tom thought of something and said:  

“Do you have any spiders in here, Jim?”  

“No, sir, thank God I don’t, Mr. Tom.”  

“All right, we’ll get you some.”  

“But thank you, I don’t want any. I’m afraid of them. I’ll soon have rattlesnakes around.”  

Tom thought a minute or two and said:  

“That’s a good idea. I think it’s been done before. It must have been done; it makes sense. Yes, it’s a great idea. Where would you keep it?”  

“Keep what, Mr. Tom?”  

“Why, a rattlesnake.”  

“My goodness! If a rattlesnake came in here I would bust right through that log wall with my head.”  

“Why, Jim, you wouldn’t be scared after a little while. You could tame it.”  

“Tame it!”

“Yes—it's easy enough. Every animal appreciates kindness and petting, and they won't think of hurting a person who pets them. Any book will tell you that. Just try—that's all I ask. Try for two or three days. In a short time you can get him to love you, to sleep with you, not stay away from you for a minute, and to let you wrap him around your neck and even put his head in your mouth.”

“Please, Mars Tom—don't talk like that! I can't stand it! He would let me put his head in my mouth—just as a favor, right? I think he would wait a very long time before I asked him. And besides that, I don't want him to sleep with me.”

“Jim, don't act so foolish. A prisoner needs to have some simple pet, and if no one has ever tried a rattlesnake, then being the first to try it would bring more glory than any other way you could think of to save your life.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I don't want any of that glory. If a snake bites Jim's chin off, then what's the glory? No, sir, I don't want any of that.”

“Come on, can't you try? I only want you to try—you don't have to keep going if it doesn't work.”

“But the problem would be if the snake bites me while I'm trying to handle it. Mars Tom, I'm willing to try almost anything that isn't unreasonable, but if you and Huck bring a rattlesnake here for me to tame, I'm going to leave. That's for sure.”

“Well, then, let it go if you’re so stubborn about it.  
We can get you some garter snakes. You can tie buttons on their tails and pretend they’re rattlesnakes. I think that will be enough.”

“I can stand them, Mars Tom, but blame me if I can’t live without them, I tell you. I never knew before how much trouble it is to be a prisoner.”

“It always is when it’s done right. Do you have any rats around here?”

“No, sir, I haven’t seen any.”

“Well, we’ll get you some rats.”

“No, Mars Tom, I don’t want any rats. They’re the worst creatures to bother a person, scurry around, and bite your feet when you’re trying to sleep. No, sir, give me garter snakes if I must have them, but don’t give me rats; I have no use for them, honestly.”

“But Jim, you have to have them—they all do. So don’t make a fuss. Prisoners always have rats. There isn’t a case without them. People train them, pet them, teach them tricks, and they become as social as flies. But you have to play music for them. Do you have anything to make music with?”

“I only have a rough comb, a piece of paper, and a jaw harp, but I don’t think they’ll care about a jaw harp.”

“Yes, they would. They don’t care what kind of music it is. A jew’s harp is good enough even for a rat. All animals like music—in a prison they love it, especially sad music. You can’t get any other kind of sound from a jew’s harp. It always catches their attention; they come out to see what’s happening with you. Yes, you’re fine; you’re in good shape. You sit on your bed at night before you sleep, and early in the morning, and play your jew’s harp. Play ‘The Last Link Is Broken’—that’s the tune that will catch a rat faster than anything else. After you’ve played for about two minutes you’ll see all the rats, snakes, spiders and other creatures start to get nervous about you and come over. They will swarm around you and have a good time.”

“Yes, they will, I think, Mars Tom, but what kind of time does Jim have? I’d be surprised if I could see the pint. But I’ll do it if I have to. I think I’d better keep the animals satisfied so there won’t be any trouble in the house.”

Tom paused to think it over and to see if there was anything else. Soon he said:

“Oh, there’s one thing I forgot. Could you grow a flower here, do you think?”

“I don’t know, but maybe I could, Mars Tom. It’s pretty dark here, and I have no use for a flower. It would probably cause a lot of trouble.”

“Well, try it anyway. Some other prisoners have done it.”

“One of those big cat‑tail‑looking mullen stalks might grow here, Mars Tom, I think, but it wouldn’t be worth all the trouble it would bring.”

"Don't believe that. We'll get you a small one, and you can plant it in the corner over there and look after it. Don't call it *mullen*; call it *Pitchiola*—that's the right name when it's in a prison. And you should water it with your tears."

"Why, I have plenty of spring water, Mars Tom."

"You don't want spring water; you want to water it with your tears. That's how they always do it."

"Why, Mars Tom, I can raise one of those *mullen* stalks with spring water, while another man can start one with tears."

"That's not the idea. You have to do it with tears."

"She'll die in my hands, Mars Tom. She surely will, because I never, ever cry."

Tom was confused. He thought about it and then told Jim he would have to manage as best he could with an onion. He promised to go to the cabins and put a private person in Jim’s coffee pot the next morning.  

Jim said he would soon have a “backer” in his coffee and complained a lot about it. He also complained about the work of raising the mule, dealing with the rats, and taking care of snakes, spiders, and other animals. On top of that, he had to work on pens, inscriptions, journals, and similar tasks. All of this made being a prisoner feel more difficult and stressful than anything he had ever done before.  

Tom lost his patience with Jim. He said Jim was burdened with more chances to make a name for himself than any prisoner ever had, but Jim didn’t understand them and they were almost wasted.  

Jim felt sorry, promised not to behave that way again, and then Tom and I went to bed.
