It would still be about an hour before breakfast, so we left and went into the woods. Tom said we needed a little light to see where to dig, but a lantern is too bright and could get us into trouble. What we needed were a lot of the rotten chunks called fox‑fire, which give a soft glow when you place them in a dark place. We collected an armful and hid it in the weeds, then sat down to rest. Tom said, looking a bit dissatisfied:

Blame it, this whole thing is as easy and awkward as it can be. That makes it extremely hard to carry out a plan. There is no watchman to be drugged—there should be a watchman. There isn’t even a dog to give a sleeping mixture to. Jim is chained by one leg with a ten‑foot chain to his bed. All you have to do is lift the bed and slip the chain off. Uncle Silas trusts everyone; he gives the key to the pumpkin‑headed black man and doesn’t send anyone to watch him. Jim could have gotten out of that window before, but it wouldn’t help to travel with a ten‑foot chain on his leg. Damn it, Huck, this is the stupidest arrangement I’ve ever seen. You have to invent all the difficulties yourself. Well, we can’t change that; we have to make the best of what we have. In any case, there is one thing—there is more honor in getting him out through many difficulties and dangers, when none of those difficulties were provided by the people who were supposed to provide them, and you had to think them up yourself. Now look at the lantern. When you get down to the facts, we simply have to pretend that a lantern is risky. We could use a torchlight procession if we wanted to, I think. While I’m thinking about it, we need to find something to make a saw as soon as we can.

“What do we want a saw for?”

“What do we want from it? Don't we have to saw off the leg of Jim’s bed so we can free the chain?”

“You just said someone could lift the bed and slip the chain off.”

“Exactly, that’s just like you, Huck Finn. You always find the simplest way to do something. Haven’t you ever read any books—Baron Trenck, Casanova, Benvenuto Cellini, Henry IV., or any of those heroes? Who ever heard of freeing a prisoner in such a delicate way? No. The best method is to saw the bed‑leg in two, leave it like that, and swallow the sawdust so it can’t be found. Then put some dirt and grease around the cut so even the sharpest eye won’t see any sign of it being sawed. It will look perfectly solid. On the night you’re ready, give the leg a kick and it falls down; the chain comes off, and you’re free. Then just attach your rope ladder to the battlements, climb down, break your leg in the moat—because the rope ladder is nineteen feet too short, you know—and your horses and loyal servants will pick you up, put you on a saddle, and away you go to your homeland, Langudoc, Navarre, or wherever. It’s flashy, Huck. I wish there were a moat around this cabin. If we have time on the night of the escape, we’ll dig one.”

I said:

“What do we need a moat for if we’re going to slip him out from under the cabin?”

But he never listened to me. He had forgotten me and everything else. He rested his chin on his hand, thinking. Soon he sighed, shook his head, sighed again, and said:

“No, that won’t work—there’s not enough reason for it.”

“For what?” I asked.

“To saw Jim’s leg off,” he replied.

“Good heavens!” I said. “There’s no need for that. Why would you want to saw his leg off, anyway?”

“Well, some of the most respected people have done it. They couldn’t get the chain off, so they cut off their hand and shoved. A leg would be even better. But we have to let that go. There isn’t enough reason in this case; and besides, Jim is black and wouldn’t understand the reasons or that it’s a custom in Europe, so we’ll drop it. But there’s one thing—he could have a rope ladder. We can tear up our sheets and make a rope ladder easily. We can even send it to him inside a pie; that’s how it’s usually done. I’ve eaten worse pies.”

“Come on, Tom Sawyer, how can you say that,” I said. “Jim has no use for a rope ladder.”

“He does need one. The way you talk, you don’t know anything about it. He must have a rope ladder; everyone does.”

“What on earth can he do with it?”

“What should we do with it? He can hide it in his bed, can’t he? That’s what everyone does, and he has to do it too. Huck, you never seem to want to do anything normal; you always want to start something new. Suppose he doesn’t do anything with it. Isn’t it in his bed as a clue after he leaves? And don’t you think they’ll want clues? Of course they will. And you wouldn’t leave any for them? That would be a real mess, wouldn’t it? I’ve never heard of anything like that.

“Well,” I said, “if the rules say he must have it, then let him have it. I don’t want to break any regulations. But there’s one thing, Tom Sawyer—if we have to tear our sheets to make a rope ladder for Jim, Aunt Sally will be angry with us, that’s for sure. In my opinion, a simple bark ladder costs nothing, wastes nothing, and works just as well for carrying a pie or hiding in a straw bundle as any rag ladder you could make. As for Jim, he has no experience, so he doesn’t care what kind of—”

“Oh, come on, Huck Finn, if I were as clueless as you I’d stay quiet—that’s what I’d do. Who has ever heard of a prisoner escaping with a bark ladder? It’s completely ridiculous.”

“Alright, Tom, do it your way; but if you listen to my advice, let me borrow a sheet from the clothesline.” He agreed, and then he had another idea: “Borrow a shirt, too.”

“What do we want a shirt for, Tom?”

“Jim needs it to keep a journal.”

“Your granny says Jim can’t write.”

“If he can’t write, he can still make marks on the shirt, right? We could make him a pen from an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron barrel hoop.”

“Why, Tom, we could pull a feather from a goose and make a better pen, and faster too.”

“Prisoners don’t have geese running around the castle keep to get feathers from, you fool. They always make their pens from the hardest, toughest piece of old brass candlestick they can find, and it takes them weeks and months to file it out because they have to rub it on the wall. They wouldn’t use a goose feather even if they had one. It isn’t normal.”

“So, what will we make the ink from?”

“Many people use iron rust and tears, but that’s the common way. The best writers use their own blood. Jim can do that, and when he wants to send a small mysterious message to let the world know where he is, he can write it on the bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out the window. The Iron Mask always did that, and it’s a very good way, too.”

“Jim doesn’t have any tin plates. They feed him in a pan.”

“That’s not a problem; we can get him some.”

“No one can read his plates.”

“That doesn’t have anything to do with it, Huck Finn. All he has to do is write on the plate and throw it away. You don’t have to be able to read it. In fact, most of the time you can’t read anything a prisoner writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else.

“Well then, what’s the point of wasting the plates?”

“Because, blame it all, it’s not the prisoner’s plates.”

“But they’re somebody’s plates, aren’t they?”

“Well, whose? What does the prisoner care whose—”

He stopped there because we heard the breakfast horn blowing. So we went back to the house.

In the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt from the clothes‑line. I found an old sack and put them in it. Then we went down, got the fox‑fire, and put that in too.  

I called it borrowing because that’s what my dad always called it, but Tom said it wasn’t borrowing, it was stealing. He said we were representing prisoners, and prisoners don’t mind how they get something—they just take it, and nobody blames them. He said it isn’t a crime for a prisoner to steal what he needs to escape; it’s his right. So, as long as we were representing a prisoner, we had the right to steal anything we didn’t need in order to get out of prison. He added that if we weren’t representing prisoners, it would be a very different story, and only a mean, nasty person would steal.  

We decided we would steal everything that might be useful. Yet Tom made a big fuss one day after I stole a watermelon from the nigger‑patch and ate it. He made me give the black workers a dime without telling them why. Tom said what he meant was that we could steal anything we *needed*. I said I needed the watermelon. He replied that I didn’t need it to escape, and that was the difference. He said if I had wanted to hide a knife in it and send it to Jim to kill the seneschal, that would have been okay.  

So I let it go, even though I couldn’t see any benefit in representing a prisoner if I had to argue about such fine details every time I wanted a watermelon.

Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning until everyone had settled down to work. There was nobody around the yard. Then Tom carried the sack into the lean‑to while I stood a short distance away to keep watch. After a while he came out, and we sat on the woodpile to talk. He said:

“Everything’s fine now except for tools, and that’s easy to fix.”

“Tools?” I asked.

“Yes.”

“Tools for what?”

“To dig with. We’re not going to dig him out, are we?”

“Aren’t those old cracked picks and things in there good enough to dig a man out with?” I said.

He turned to me, looking so pitiful it could make anyone cry, and said:

“Huck Finn, have you ever heard of a prisoner having picks and shovels and all the modern comforts in his cell to dig himself out with? Now I want to ask you—if you have any sense at all—what kind of story that would make him a hero? They might as well give him the key and be done with it. Picks and shovels—why, they would give those to a king.”

“Well then,” I said, “if we don’t want the picks and shovels, what do we want?”

“A couple of pocket knives.”

“To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?”

“Yes.”

“Damn it, that’s foolish, Tom.”

"It doesn't make any difference how foolish it is; it's the right way, and it's the usual way. There's no other way that I've ever heard of, and I've read all the books that give any information about these things. They always dig out with a pocket knife—not through dirt, mind you; usually it's through solid rock. It takes them weeks and weeks, forever. Look at a prisoner in the bottom dungeon of Castle Deef, in the harbor of Marseilles, who dug his way out that way. How long do you think he spent on it?"

"I don't know."

"Well, guess."

"I don't know. A month and a half."

"Thirty‑seven years, and he emerged in China. That's the kind. I wish the bottom of this fortress were solid rock."

"Jim doesn't know anyone in China."

"What does that have to do with anything? The other fellow didn't either. But you always drift onto side issues. Why can't you stick to the main point?"

"All right—I don't care where he comes out, so he comes out; and Jim doesn't, either, I think. But there's one thing: Jim is too old to be dug out with a pocket knife. He won't survive."

"He will survive, too. You don't think it will take thirty‑seven years to dig out through a dirt foundation, do you?"

"How long will it take, Tom?"

“Well, we can’t wait as long as we’d like, because Uncle Silas might hear about it soon from New Orleans. He’ll hear that Jim isn’t there. Then his next move will be to look for Jim, or something like that. So we can’t spend as much time digging him out as we should. Ideally we would take a couple of years, but we can’t. Since things are uncertain, I recommend this: we dig in quickly. After that we can pretend to ourselves that we’ve been at it for thirty‑seven years. Then we can pull him out and rush him away the first time there’s an alarm. Yes, I think that’s the best way.”

“That makes sense,” I say. “Pretending costs nothing; it isn’t a problem. If it helps, I don’t mind pretending we’ve been at it for a hundred and fifty years. It won’t bother me after I start. So I’ll go on and cut a couple of pocket knives.”

“Cut three,” he says. “We need one to make a saw from.”

“Tom, if it’s not illegal or immoral to suggest it,” I say, “there’s an old rusty saw blade over there, stuck under the weather‑board behind the smokehouse.”

He looked tired and discouraged, and said, “It’s no use trying to teach you anything, Huck. Go and cut the knives—three of them.” So I did it.
